For the remainder of this course,
we're gonna work in another
package within this repo.
And it's a notes package, so
the point here is really to have examples
of TypeScript code that we can poke at.
We may try to build it at times,
but it's mainly just so
we have an authoring
environment that we can share.
It matches what we're gonna be looking
at on the website, if we go and look at
the website, it's gonna be each code
snippet that you're able to see there.
So you're going to go to
notes TS fundamentals v4.
We're gonna open up this source folder,
and
you can see for every chapter of
this course we have a notes file.
In JavaScript,
you're familiar with this concept here,
right this is a variable declaration.
We're using let here, and let would allow
us to reassign this variable, right?
And if we hover over
this word temperature.
Well, we're being told we
haven't used this variable, but
we'll use it in a sec, but
we can see let temperature, colon number.
So what we're seeing here is TypeScript
has inferred that this is a number
based on us just saying that we're
initializing this variable to 6.
It knows that we're dealing
with numbers here, and
what we get here is type checking.
So TypeScript said okay you
initially gave me this number 6 and
now I'm going to try to
use the string warm and
TypeScript objects it says string
is not assignable to type number,
what we're seeing here is that
variables are sort of born with types.
Meaning, if we have something like this,
and temperature is a number,
there's really nothing we can do to make
this variable accept a different type.
There are things we could do on this line
that will make it initially be created
with a different type.
But once it's created,
a variables type can never change.
Let's try the same thing with const.
So, can somebody tell me in the classroom
like what's the difference between a const
declaration and a let declaration?
Go ahead.
>> It const is constant so
you can't change the value.
>> You can't reassign the variable
common misconception that you can't
change the value, so in this case it's
actually both 79 is a number, and
in JavaScript that's
an immutable value type.
We never change numbers,
we can only create new numbers.
So here we have non re
assignability coming from const,
but we also have
immutability coming from 79.
As opposed to if we made
this an array like this,
we can certainly change the value, we can
push more things into the array, right?
It's not like it's frozen in place, the
variable always will point to that array,
but we can change the array in place.
We can't change this number in place,
we can't make it 80.
So, let's look at the type of this,
const humidity79, 79 in this context,
it's not a value, it's a type.
TypeScript has noted that we
have an immutable value type.
And we can never reassign this
variable humidity can never be
anything other than 79,
we could assign it or
we couldn't assign it to something
new like it's only the number 79.
So I want you to start building a little
bit of a mental model here based on sets.
Does everybody know what a set is?
It's like a group of values where there
are no duplicates in the list of values,
so you could think of types as
describing a set of allowed values.
So, of course a let declaration lets
us reassign given a different number.
We can actually take this 79
that we had in humidity, and
we could set the temperature equal to 79,
right?
There's no problem with that,
temperature will accept any number.
Now what we can't do, while for
a variety of reasons but
we can't take temperature and
assign it to humidity because
humidity is a constant.
Yeah, we're gonna have to make
this slightly different, and
I'll explain why in a moment.
So I'm making this a let declaration
that sort of allows us to
have re-assignability, but
it's typed is still 79.
I'm doing something here called
casting where I'm saying,
I have value here, this is the type
I want you to regard this value as.
So here we can see number is
not assignable to type 79, and
if we think about this in terms of sets.
Humidity is allowed to be any number
as long as it's the number 79
It's only got one thing and it said
it can only accept 79s on this line
13 You can see it's perfectly happy
to accept a new number 79 like
this is in a different place in
memory Than this original 79 here.
So we are assigning it a new number, but
it must be exactly the value that we gave
it before, it must be just that one value.
Here, we're seeing that we can't
just take an arbitrary number and
put it into a slot that only accepts 79s,
because of course,
they're all of the other numbers, right?
We can't ensure that there's
compatibility there, so
we would say this is a very general type,
and this is a very specific type.
And here's an example of us trying
to put a specific value in there,
78 is not a 79, but
if I change this, it would be fine.
So what we would call this here,
it's a literal type,
and that means we're using a value and
creating a type that represents
only that one value.
We could do the same thing with
the string if we wanted to.
String is also an immutable value type,
const does not allow us to reassign.
So those two facts mean this
will always be foo, right?
So that's called a literal type, and
I'm going to put this back to const.
Let's think more about types as
representing sets of values.
So if we create another variable here,
we're calling it temp2,
we're setting it equal to 19, the type
of temp2 number represents the set
of all numbers, that's what I'm
using these little braces for here.
If we use this as const casting here,
we're basically saying,
I want the mutability of let,
but treat it in terms of obtaining
its type as if it's a const, right?
And you can see we get that 79 here,
just as above where we
were saying like 79 as 79.
This is kind of the same thing,
except it's saying,
instead of saying the 79 type again,
we're just saying treat it like it's
a const in terms of inferring its title.
So now we have a lead declaration that's
also just containing this one thing.
When we're doing something like this,
anytime we see an equal sign,
we're performing what we call
a type equivalence check.
And that means, can the type of
the variable or function parameter or
whatever it is,
on the left side of the equals,
can that hold a value of
the type on the right side?
So can a number,
something that wants a number,
will that be happy if I give it a 79?
Sure.
But if I have something that only
accepts 79s, I can't just give
it any arbitrary number,
it only wants that one specific number.
Does this make sense,
thinking about types in terms of
the values that type will accept.
>> So
could you do let humidity equals 10 as 79
>> Let's try that You could,
don't do this.
You could this is like,
I described this as casting,
a lot of languages have
this concept of casting.
When you do casting,
you're effectively telling the TypeScript,
you know better, there's telling the type
checking system you know better,
irrespective of what this value is.
Well, in this case we're
gonna get an objection here,
because there's even more incompatibility.
But you're telling it,
I know what I'm doing,
please regard this as this other type,
it's really sort of a heavy-handed
way to override the safety that
typescript would normally give you.
Now, this is why it's sort of preferred
to do this, because it ensures you
get like a valid type that fits this
value It's just a very specific type,
but it will always be valid
you're just telling typescript to
be more bold in its assumptions
that like it's not just any number.
It's specifically the number 79, what
TypeScript generally tries to do is make
the most reasonable assumption it can
make without getting in your way.
So if every let declaration like this
turned out to be specifically the type 79,
like that would interfere with our ability
to use let's the way
we normally use let's.
This is why we see the behavior
change when we switch to const,
because it can make safely a more specific
assumption without getting in your way.
So sometimes we need to declare
a variable before it's initialized.
And let me uncomment
the next section here.
So in this example,
we have sort of a time interval,
that's what we're trying to model here.
So we have a random wait time up at
the top, we generate some random value.
We have a time interval, we know the start
time, because we're running this code, and
then we initialize start time,
we get a new date.
That is like right now,
at the moment, that date invocation,
that date instance is created,
endTime we're gonna fill in later, right?
We need to wait however
long this random wait is.
And then we'll know what the endTime is,
and what we can see here is endTime,
because we don't initialize this variable,
it is of type any.
We would call this an implicit any, any,
you can think of as a type that represents
the way variables work in JavaScript.
You could take this and
you could make it a function,
or you could then pass it a number,
you could then give it an HTML input tag,
and it would be happy to accept
all of these things, right?
Any is ,we'll talk more about this in
the intermediate TypeScript course,
but we would call this a top type.
It can accept absolutely any value that
is possible to create in JavaScript.
But this isn't what we want,
even once we assign end time its
date in the end,
we lose type information here.
So we talked about any why
is this an implicit any?
It's implicit because we haven't stated
a type here, but TypeScript cannot obtain
the necessary information in order
to know what this should be.
And so effectively anything
TypeScript can't figure out,
it will type as any, at least with the way
we have the compiler set up right now.
We can change this though, we can give
this what's called a type annotation.
And we've already seen this, we saw this
in our our hello world TypeScript program.
We're gonna add a colon and then date.
See how it says interface date?
This is the type of a date instance.
And down here you can see all right,
well we're being busted now
we're setting endTime =0.
While it should be a date, this is a line
of code that shouldn't have worked
like in regular JavaScript this would have
worked we might not have noticed this.
But now if we had some function that would
like measured the start and the end time
and give us a very human-readable time
interval, how many seconds is this?
How many it would format it properly
like now we know we're not gonna work
with a number here we will always have
a date and a date both of these end up
being dates this one up here start time
gets it because of how we initialize
the variable and here we have
this explicit type annotation.
And you'll see this pattern all over the
place, it works for function parameters,
it works for function return types for
class fields, it's just colon and
then the name of the type.
So we can delete this because,
that's a bug, and we'll move forward